Port Scanning with Nmap
Nmap is one of the
most popular, versatile,
and robust port scanners available.
Some of the Nmap example scans we
cover in this module are run using sudo.
This is due to the fact that
quite a few Nmap scanning options
require access to raw sockets,
which in turn require root privileges.
Let’s explore some port scanning examples
to get a better feel for Nmap
and its options.
Accountability for Our Traffic
A default Nmap TCP scan
will scan the 1,000 most popular
ports on a given machine.
Before we start running scans blindly,
let’s examine the amount of traffic
sent by this type of scan.
We’ll scan one of the lab machines
while using iptables
to monitor the amount of
traffic sent to the target.
First, we’ll use the iptables -I option
to insert a new rule into the
INPUT chain in the first position…
… -s to specify a source IP address,
which is the IP address
we are going to scan…
…and -j ACCEPT
to allow the traffic to pass.
We’ll also add a rule to the OUTPUT chain.
This time, we specify OUTPUT as the chain
and use -d to specify the
destination IP address.
Lastly, we will use the -Z option
to zero the packet and
byte counters in all chains.
Now let’s generate
some traffic using nmap.
We’ll run a default scan by
providing the target IP address
without any other options.
The scan completed and
revealed a few open ports.
Now let’s inspect some iptables statistics
to get an idea of how much
traffic our scan generated.
We will use the -v option to
add some verbosity to our output,
-n to enable numeric output,
and -L to list the rules
present in all chains.
According to this output,
the default 1,000-port scan has
generated around 70 kilobytes of traffic.
Let’s zero the iptables packet and
byte counters in all chains again
and run another nmap scan.
This time, we’ll use the -p option
to specify ALL TCP ports.
In this port scan explicitly
probing all 65,535 ports,
we generated about 4 megabytes of traffic,
a significantly higher amount.
These results imply that a full
Nmap scan of a class C network
would result in sending over 1,000
megabytes of traffic to the network.
this full port scan has discovered
new ports that were not found
by the default TCP scan.
In an ideal situation, a full TCP and UDP
port scan of every single target machine
would provide the most
accurate information
about exposed network services.
However, this example reveals the need
to balance any traffic restrictions
(such as a slow uplink),
with the need to discover additional
open ports and services.
In the next section, we’ll explore some
of Nmap’s various scanning techniques.
Stealth / SYN Scanning
Nmap’s preferred scanning technique
is a SYN, or “stealth” scan.
There are many benefits to using a SYN scan
and as such, it is the default scan technique
used when no scan technique is specified
and the user has the required
raw sockets privileges.
SYN scanning is a TCP port scanning method
that involves sending SYN packets
to various ports on a target machine
without completing a TCP handshake.
If a TCP port is open,
a SYN-ACK should be sent back
from the target machine,
informing us that the port is open.
At this point, nmap does not bother
to send the final ACK
to complete the three-way handshake.
To launch a SYN scan with nmap,
we preface the command with sudo
and provide the -sS option.
Because the three-way handshake
is never completed,
the information is not
passed to the application layer
and as a result, will not appear
in any application logs.
A SYN scan is also faster
and more efficient
because fewer packets
are sent and received.
Note that the term “stealth”
refers to the fact that, in the past,
primitive firewalls would fail to log
incomplete TCP connections.
Combined with the fact that application
logs wouldn't catch the scan.
TCP Connect Scanning
When a user running nmap does not have
raw socket privileges,
Nmap will default to the TCP connect scan
technique described earlier.
Since a TCP connect scan makes use
of the Berkeley sockets API
to perform the three-way handshake,
it does not require elevated privileges.
However, because Nmap has to wait
for the connection to complete
before the API will return
the status of the connection,
a connect scan takes much longer
to complete than a SYN scan.
There might be times when we need
to specifically perform a connect scan,
for example, when scanning
through certain types of proxies.
We use the -sT option
to start a connect scan.
Next, we’ll move on to UDP scanning.
UDP Scanning
When performing a UDP scan,
Nmap will use a combination
of two different methods
to determine if a port is open or closed.
For most ports, it will use the standard
“ICMP port unreachable”
method described earlier
by sending an empty packet
to a given port.
However, for common ports,
such as port 161
that is used by SNMP,
it will send a protocol-specific
SNMP packet
in an attempt to get a response from
an application bound to that port.
To perform a UDP scan, the -sU option
is used and sudo is required
to access raw sockets.
The UDP scan can also be used in
conjunction with a TCP SYN scan
to build a more complete
picture of our target.
In the next section,
we’ll explore techniques for
handling larger networks,
or networks with traffic constraints.
Network Sweeping
To deal with large volumes of hosts,
or to otherwise try to conserve
network traffic,
we can attempt to probe targets
using Network Sweeping techniques,
in which we begin with broad scans,
and use more specific scans against
hosts of interest.
When performing a network sweep
with Nmap using the -sn option,
the host discovery process
consists of more than just
sending an ICMP echo request.
Several other probes are used
in addition to the ICMP request.
Nmap also sends a TCP SYN packet
to port 443,
a TCP ACK packet to port 80,
and an ICMP timestamp request
to verify if a host is available or not.
Searching for live machines
using the grep command
on a standard nmap output
can be cumbersome.
Instead, let’s use Nmap’s “greppable”
output parameter,
-oG,
to save these results into a format
that is easier to manage.
Now we can easily grep the text file
for machines that are up.
We can also sweep for specific
TCP or UDP ports across the network,
probing for common services and ports,
in an attempt to locate systems
that may be useful,
or otherwise have known vulnerabilities.
In this scan, we will look for
TCP port 80.
This scan tends to be more accurate
than a ping sweep.
Now we can quickly get
a list of IP addresses
that have TCP port 80 open on them.
To save time and network resources,
we can also scan multiple IPs,
probing for a short list of common ports.
For example, let’s conduct a
TCP connect scan
for the top twenty TCP ports
with the –top-ports option…
and enable OS version detection,
script scanning, and traceroute with -A.
The top twenty ports are determined
by the nmap services file.
The file uses a simple format
of 3 whitespace-separated columns.
The first is the name of the service,
the second contains the
port number and protocol
and the third, the “port frequency”.
Everything after the third column is ignored
but is typically used for comments.
The port frequency is based on
how often the port was found open
during research scans of the internet.
At this point, we could conduct a more
exhaustive scan
against individual machines
that are service-rich
or are otherwise interesting.
There are many different ways
we can be creative with our scanning
to conserve bandwidth
or lower our profile.
OS Fingerprinting
Nmap has a built-in feature
called OS fingerprinting
that attempts to guess the
target’s operating system
by inspecting returned packets.
This is possible because operating systems
often have slightly
different implementations
of the TCP/IP stack
and these slight variances create a
fingerprint that Nmap can often identify.
Nmap will inspect the traffic
received from the target machine
and attempt to match the
fingerprint to a known list.
The OS fingerprinting option
can be enabled with the -O option.
The response suggests
that the underlying
\operating system of this target
is either Windows 7
or Windows 2008 R2.
Note that OS Fingerprinting
is not always 100% accurate,
but a best-guess attempt.
Consider a more careful
examination of the target
to confirm an OS fingerprint scan.
Banner Grabbing/Service Enumeration
We can identify services
running on specific ports
by inspecting service banners
and running various OS
and service enumeration
scripts against the target.
Nmap’s -sV option
probes open ports to determine
service and version information.
Keep in mind that banners can be modified
by system administrators.
As such,
these can be intentionally
set to fake service names
in order to mislead a potential attacker.
Nmap Scripting Engine (NSE)
The Nmap Scripting Engine is used
to launch user-created scripts
in order to automate various
scanning tasks.
These scripts perform a broad range
of functions including DNS enumeration,
brute force attacks,
and even vulnerability identification.
NSE scripts are located in the
/usr/share/nmap/scripts directory.
Let’s try out a few NSE scripts
to see how they work.
The smb-os-discovery script
attempts to connect to the
SMB service on a target system
and determine its operating system.
Another useful (and self-explanatory)
NSE script
is dns-zone-transfer.
To view more information about a script,
we can use the –script-help option.
This option displays a description
of the script
and a URL where we can find
more in-depth information,
such as the script arguments
and usage examples.
For times when internet
access is not available,
much of this information can also
be found in the NSE script file itself.
Take time to explore the
various NSE scripts,
as many of them are helpful
and time-saving.